# Gender-and-Overdue-Debt

Investigating the relationship between gender and overdue debt

# Authors: Harini Mittal, Ephraiam Chang, Yiwen Liao

# Technology used: Python

Are female credit-card customers defaulters?                                                        Group 8
Historically, the financial landscape was characterized by gender-based discrimination, with women facing significant hurdles in obtaining credit. We used data mining techniques to inquire if female customers of credit cards are more likely to have overdue or bad debts.
Main Findings:
We analyzed the Kaggle credit card dataset  using logistic regression, focusing on the STATUS variable (0 for overdue/bad debts, 1 for paid/off debts). The primary independent variable was CODE_GENDER (1 for female, 0 for male), along with 10 other independent variables, some categorical. Dummy variables were created, resulting in 24 variables. Box plots identified outliers, and logistic regression was performed with and without outliers. Outliers beyond ±3 standard deviations were removed using z-scores, yielding consistent results in both cases for the logistic regression model provided below.

Log [probability of “No overdue or bad debts”/(1-prob of “No overdue or bad debts”)] = 1.7096 -0.0222*Female -0.0056*FLAG_OWN_CAR-0.0006*FLAG_OWN_REALTY-0.129*CNT_CHILDREN-3.174e-07*AMT_INCOME_TOTAL-1.1882e-06*DAYS_BIRTH +0.0226*MONTHS_BALANCE-0.0549*NAME_INCOME_TYPE_Pensioner+0.0368*NAME_INCOME_TYPE_Stateservant+0.9454*NAME_INCOME_TYPE_Student+0.0478*NAME_INCOME_TYPE_Working-0.5239*NAME_EDUCATION_TYPE_Highereducation-0.5985*NAME_EDUCATION_TYPE_Incompletehigher-0.3805*NAME_EDUCATION_TYPE_Lowersecondary-0.6348*
NAME_EDUCATION_TYPE_Secondary/secondaryspecial-0.0856*NAME_FAMILY_STATUS_Married-0.512*NAME_FAMILY_STATUS_Separated-0.1247*NAME_FAMILY_STATUS_Single/not married-0.1201*NAME_FAMILY_STATUS_Widow-0.0804*NAME_HOUSING_TYPE_House/apartment-0.0967*NAME_HOUSING_TYPE_Municipal apartment-0.0019*NAME_HOUSING_TYPE_Office apartment-0.1053*NAME_HOUSING_TYPE_Rented apartment-0.1029*NAME_HOUSING_TYPE_With parents

Our logistic regression model revealed that female gender was negatively related to the log odds of STATUS in that increasing a female customer by 1 decreases the log-odds of debts being repaid by 0.0222 if all other independent variables are constant. We found that the recency of the data by month, people with a higher number of children, persons from all types of housing or way of living except office apartments, and all kinds of education levels had a negative significant relationship with log-odds of debts being repaid. People with all kinds of income types had a positive significant relationship with log-odds of debts being repaid. Although the amount of income had a negative significant relationship with log-odds of debts being repaid, the co-efficient was extremely small, almost negligible.  The accuracy of our prediction was 62.8%.  
We conducted a decision tree analysis for all the above variables but dropped the MONTH-BALANCE to understand the order of importance of the independent variables irrespective of the recency of data. We found that age (DAYS_BIRTH) is the most important variable followed by total income for older customers (>26 years), and number of children for younger customers(<= 26 years). Amongst the younger customers without any children, those who lived with their parents, and were less than 22 years of age, had no outstanding debt. Younger customers without any children, who did not live with their parents with income less than $168,750 had 40.8% chance of default. Younger customers with at least one child who lived in an apartment and had income less than $168,750 had 50% chance of default.Younger customers with at least one child who lived in an apartment and had income less than $195750 had 91% chance of default, but those who did not live in an apartment and had higher education had 25% chance of default.  The probability of default amongst 68-year-old people was 32%. Those who were between 26 and 27 years old, with income <=$101250, and lived with parents had a default rate of almost 82%. But those in that age group, with income >$101250 but<$380250 had 50% chance of default. Interestingly, gender did not show up as a variable in the decision tree analysis that had an accuracy of 61%.
Conclusions:
Based on our logistic regression model, we advise the bank manager to prioritize financial literacy initiatives for female and younger customers, as they are more prone to overdue or bad debts. Research suggests that mentoring and supporting women can yield positive impacts, given their tendency to contribute to family and community welfare. Similarly, providing financial guidance to younger customers can expedite their debt management. Investing time in mentorship for both groups is prudent, with long-term benefits. We recommend offering mentorship and support specifically tailored to women and younger customers, encouraging them to seek assistance from the bank for their financial decisions.
